**Tarpana for Devas, Rishis and Pitris** <br> <br>

**Sankalpam (vow)** <br>
om adya çubha dine çubha muhürte devarñipitåprétyarthaà devarñipitåtarpaëam yathäçakti kariñye| <br>

**Deva Tarpana**<br>

om brahmä tåpyatäm| om viñëuù tåpyatäm| om rudraù tåpyatäm| om prajäpatiù tåpyatäm|<br>
om deväù tåpyantäm| om devyaù tåpyantäm| om vasavaù tåpyantäm| om rudräù tåpyantäm| <br>
om ädityäù tåpyantäm| om vedäù tåpyantäm| om åñayaù tåpyantäm| om gandharväù tåpyantäm| <br>
om apsarasaù tåpyantäm| om nägäù tåpyantäm| om oñadhayaù tåpyantäm| <br>

**Rishi Tarpana** <br>
You need to continue to sit facing **east** with the **right knee in contact with earth**. You need to use the water containing akshatas and do 
the same way as in Deva tarpana. Use the following mantras.<br>

om kaçyapaù tåpyatäm| om atriù tåpyatäm| om vasiñöhaù tåpyatäm| om viçvämitraù tåpyatäm| <br>
om gautamaù tåpyatäm| om bharadväjaù tåpyatäm| om jamadagniù tåpyatäm| om aìgéräù tåpyatäm| <br>
om kutsaù tåpyatäm| om bhåguù tåpyatäm| <br>

Some changes before the next sections <br>
Sit facing the **south** direction. So sit with the **left leg on the ground and the right leg on top of left leg**. 
Pour some black sesame seeds in the water pot. The style of releasing water from now onwards: <br>
Take some water, hold it in the right palm, say each mantra and release it sideways
from the area below the base of the index finger, i.e. from the area marked as “3” in the picture. 
Three offerings are made with each mantra now.
If you have 3 darbhas in your hand, place them on the index finger, with the tips of darbhas aligned with the tip of the
index finger. Water should be touching the base of darbhas as it leaves the palm. If you do not have darbhas, do not worry.<br>

**Pitri Tarpana** <br>
These are offerings to various deceased ancestors of various lives. First place the water pot in front of you, bow to it and imagine that
ancestors are present and will accept your water oblations.Use the following mantras and release water 3 times or one time with each mantra on encountering numbers, in the style previously <br>
mentioned. Please note that 3 offerings are made to **3 generations of maternal and paternal ancestors, while only one offering is made to other people**. <br>

mama sarvajanmasu pitaraù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1|| <br>
tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||2|| <br> tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>

---_To beings who played the role of **father’s father** in various lives to you_:** <br>
mama sarvajanmasu pitämahäù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||2|| tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>

---_To beings who played the role of **father’s father’s father** in various lives to you_: <br>
mama sarvajanmasu prapitämahäù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||2||<br> tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **mother** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu mätaraù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||2|| <br> täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **father’s mother** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu pitämahyaù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||2||<br> täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **father’s father’s mother** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu prapitämahyaù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||2|| täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||3||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **wife** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu patnyaù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **husband** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu patayaù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **son** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu puträù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **daughter** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu kanyäù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù täbhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of a **dear one** in various lives to you_:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu äptajanäù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
---_To beings who played the role of **one born in the same lineage** in various lives to you:<br>
mama sarvajanmasu svakulajätäù tåpyantäm idaà tilodakaà svadhäyibhyaù tebhyaù svadhä namaù ||1||<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

**Conclusion**<br>
Now throw away the remaining water in the pot. Put back the sacred thread in the normal way (see previous sections for the<br>
description). Sit facing the east. Say the following and think that you have surrendered the doership of the just finished action to the<br>
Lord. Now you should try to completely abandon the thought that “you” did it.<br>
bhagavän pitåsvarüpé janärdana väsudevaù préyatäà| om sarvam çré kåñëärpaëamastu| om çäntiù çäntiù çäntiù|<br>
